feat: AEP00002: ArmoniK APIs Definition Guidelines (#31)
aneoconsulting/ArmoniK.Community: AEP/aep-00002.md

## Use linter to validate proto files

The use of [Buf Linter](https://buf.build/docs/lint/overview) is suggested to validate that the proto files are properly writen.
The following configuration could be used.

```yaml
version: v1
lint:
  use:
    - DEFAULT
    - COMMENTS
```

It includes the following rules:

- Best practices suggest that request and response message for every RPC should be unique as changing one of these message impact every RPC that uses it.
It is recommended to have a wrapper message for RPC request and response types.
- Files should declare a package.
- Files should be in a directory according to their package name and files in the same directory should have the same package.
- Services and Messages should be named appropriately.
- Enums should have itself as prefix.
- Only leading comments are considered by Buf, so proto files should include leading comments for everything.

See [Buf Linter Rules](https://buf.build/docs/lint/rules) for an extensive description of each rule used.

## Avoid using `oneof`

gPRC `oneof` means that a value can be one of several messages.

> It highly increase the difficulty of using a message when they are used in streams and/or responses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It highly increase the complexity of using a message when they are used in streams and/or responses.
```

?

When used in streams, `oneof` messages are complicated to use since messages could need to be sent in a specific order.
The usage of this kind of method could be very difficult without appropriate documentation and state machines.

When used in responses, every case should be accounted for even for the nominal case.
It adds a lot of complexity especially in cases of errors included in `oneof` responses.
Clients have to manage every case with the possibility of most of the cases being impossible to recover from or being useless.

## Avoid using streams or provide unitary alternative

> Some systems does not support streaming such as [gRPC web](https://github.com/grpc/grpc-web) that does not support streaming from client to server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some systems does not support streaming such as [gRPC web](https://github.com/grpc/grpc-web) (gRPC web does not support streaming from client to server).
```

Therefore we should avoid stream based RPC methods especially in the control plane.
Stream based methods can still be added if an alternative with unitary calls is also added.
They can be useful for some optimizations so they are not completely banned.

## Error handling

> RPC methods should have an error message that will be sent as response metadata when there is an error during the call.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
RPC methods should have an error message that will be sent as response metadata when an error happened during the call.
```

This aims to simplify response messages as much as possible for the nominal case.

```proto
// Exemple response when call is sucessful
message MyResponse {
    // The internal data that is sent client-side
    string my_string_data = 1;
}

// Exemple error that will be sent to client as response metadata included in the rpc error
// It may include oneofs when there are several possibilities
// This should be used in conjonction with gRPC status codes and exceptions
message MyError {
    // error that occured
    string error_details = 1;
}
```

## gRPC JSON transcoding

gRPC JSON transcoding is a capability that allows to use JSON REST-like APIs to interact with a service implemented in gRPC.
It is suggested to make it available for the control plane so that clients can use REST-like request to interact with ArmoniK as it will simplify the use of ArmoniK in environments where gRPC clients are not available or difficult to use.

# Backwards Compatibility

If breaking changes are introduced in new proposal, API version should be increased.

# Reference Implementation

> A reference implementation will come as a Pull Request in ArmoniK.Api repository and this will be a first draft of our APIs that follow these guidelines.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A reference implementation will come as a Pull Request in ArmoniK.Api repository and this will be a first draft of our APIs that follow these guidelines. <!-- markdownlint-disable-line case-police -->
```

# Rejected Ideas

A few of the ideas that were rejected when designing our gRPC APIs.

## Implicit actions in services

Implicit creation of data and metadata in ArmoniK should be avoided.

> "Explicit is better than implicit" -- The Zen of Python

## Simpler filter system

Actual filters are quite complicated with several levels of `oneof` that we would rather avoid but the alternatives were not great either:

- Using a string containing the filter request means losing gRPC typing AND maintaining a completely new and custom query system.
We did not want either of them.

> ## `oneof` in response to manage errors

Reviewer: It is already above: DO NOT USE ONEOF :)

Author: That is WHY it is not a good idea.
We had this idea. We used it. Now, we know it is not a good idea. Now, it is a rejected idea

Reviewer 2: I think it should be clarified that errors must be handled via dedicated status code, with more information about the error in metadata. This metadata is a protobuf message that can contains oneof.

---
AEP: 2
Title: ArmoniK APIs Definition Guidelines
Author: Jérôme Gurhem <jgurhem@aneo.fr>
Status: Draft

> Type: Standard

Reviewer 3: This should be changed to Informational or Process.

> Type: Standard

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Type: Process
```

Reviewer 3: or maybe Informational

This aims to simplify response messages as much as possible for the nominal case.

```proto
// Exemple response when call is sucessful
message MyResponse {
    // The internal data that is sent client-side
    string my_string_data = 1;
}

// Exemple error that will be sent to client as response metadata included in the rpc error
// It may include oneofs when there are several possibilities
// This should be used in conjonction with gRPC status codes and exceptions
message MyError {
    // error that occured
    string error_details = 1;
}
```

## gRPC JSON transcoding

gRPC JSON transcoding is a capability that allows to use JSON REST-like APIs to interact with a service implemented in gRPC.
It is suggested to make it available for the control plane so that clients can use REST-like request to interact with ArmoniK as it will simplify the use of ArmoniK in environments where gRPC clients are not available or difficult to use.

# Backwards Compatibility

If breaking changes are introduced in new proposal, API version should be increased.

# Reference Implementation

> <!-- markdownlint-disable -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<!-- @case-police-ignore Api -->
```

A reference implementation will come as a Pull Request in ArmoniK.Api repository and this will be a first draft of our APIs that follow these guidelines. 

> <!-- markdownlint-restore -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

These comments should also include noteworthy implementation details such as what is the intended behavior and the expected result.

## Use linter to validate proto files

A protobuf linter must be used to validate that the proto files are properly written. We recommend  [Buf Linter](https://buf.build/docs/lint/overview).
The following configuration could be used.

```yaml
version: v1
lint:
  use:
    - DEFAULT
    - COMMENTS
```

It includes the following rules:

- Best practices suggest that request and response message for every RPC should be unique as changing one of these message impact every RPC that uses it.
It is recommended to have a wrapper message for RPC request and response types.
- Files should declare a package.
- Files should be in a directory according to their package name and files in the same directory should have the same package.
- Services and Messages should be named appropriately.
- Enums should have itself as prefix.
- Only leading comments are considered by Buf, so proto files should include leading comments for everything.

See [Buf Linter Rules](https://buf.build/docs/lint/rules) for an extensive description of each rule used.

> ## Avoid using `oneof`

Reviewer 2: Maybe add a paragraph about when it is unavoidable to have oneof. I would say when you absolutely need a oneof, you should have a message that consist entirely of a single oneof, nothing else:

```proto
// Avoid this
message MyMessage {
  string id = 0;
  oneof foo {
    string name = 1;
    int id = 2;
  }
  oneof bar {
    string name = 3;
    int id = 4;
  }
}

// Do this instead
message MyMessage {
  message Foo {
    oneof foo {
      string name = 0;
      int id = 1;
    }
  }
  message Bar {
    oneof bar {
      string name = 0;
      int id = 1;
    }
  }

  string id = 0;
  Foo foo = 1;
  Bar bar = 2;
}
```

## Avoid using streams or provide unitary alternative

Some systems does not support streaming such as [gRPC web](https://github.com/grpc/grpc-web) (gRPC web does not support streaming from client to server).
Therefore we should avoid stream based RPC methods especially in the control plane.
Stream based methods can still be added if an alternative with unitary calls is also added.
They can be useful for some optimizations so they are not completely banned.

## RPC definition and error handling

For each RPC method, provide a dedicated request type, a dedicated response type, and a dedicated error type.
The error message will be used to send metadata in the response when there is an error during the call.
This should be the case even if the message is empty or if the message has the same fields as other messages.
This aims to simplify response messages as much as possible for the nominal case.

```proto
// My service that does things
service MyService {
    // My first RPC method
    rpc MyRpc1(MyRpc1Request) return MyRpc1Response;
    // My second RPC method
    rpc MyRpc2(MyRpc2Request) return MyRpc2Response;

> }

Reviewer 2: You have messages for a single rpc. Is this wanted?

Reviewer 2: So I would recommend to remove the other rpc from the service

They can be useful for some optimizations so they are not completely banned.

## RPC definition and error handling

For each RPC method, provide a dedicated request type, a dedicated response type, and a dedicated error type.
The error message will be used to send metadata in the response when there is an error during the call.
This should be the case even if the message is empty or if the message has the same fields as other messages.
This aims to simplify response messages as much as possible for the nominal case.

```proto
// My service that does things
service MyService {
    // My first RPC method
    rpc MyRpc1(MyRpc1Request) return MyRpc1Response;
}

// Exemple request to send to the server
message MyRpc1Request {
    // An example ID the client send to the server to process
    string id = 1;
}

// Exemple response when call is sucessful
message MyRpc1Response {
    // The internal data that is sent client-side
    string my_string_data = 1;
}

// Example error that will be sent to client as response metadata included in the rpc error
// It may include oneofs when there are several possibilities
// This should be used in conjunction with gRPC status codes and exceptions

> message MyError {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
message MyRpc1Error {
```
